There is a growing imperative to understand the neurophysiological impact of our rapidly changing and diverse technological, social, chemical, and physical environments. To untangle the multidimensional and interacting effects requires data at scale across diverse populations, taking measurement out of a controlled lab environment and into the field. Electroencephalography (EEG), which has correlates with various environmental factors as well as cognitive and mental health outcomes, has the advantage of both portability and cost-effectiveness for this purpose. However, with numerous field researchers spread across diverse locations, data quality issues and researcher idle time due to insufficient participants can quickly become unmanageable and expensive problems. In programs we have established in India and Tanzania, we demonstrate that with appropriate training, structured teams, and daily automated analysis and feedback on data quality, nonspecialists can reliably collect EEG data alongside various survey and assessments with consistently high throughput and quality. Over a 30 week period, research teams were able to maintain an average of 25.6 participants per week, collecting data from a diverse sample of 7,933 participants ranging from Hadzabe hunter-gatherers to office workers. Furthermore, data quality, computed on the first 5,831 records using two common methods, PREP and FASTER, was comparable to benchmark datasets from controlled lab conditions. Altogether this resulted in a cost per participant of under $50, a fraction of the cost typical of such data collection, opening up the possibility for large-scale programs particularly in low- and middle-income countries.

A subset of large-scale EEG recordings from India and Tanzania are uploaded here along with metadata like age, mental health quotient (MHQ) score, income and sex.  This BIDS dataset was generated using MNE-BIDS from EDF source files.


References
----------

Vianney JM, Swaminathan S, Newson JJ, Parameshwaran D, Subramaniyam NP, Roy SS, Machunda R, Sapuli A, Pramanik S, Kumar JV, Tiwari P. EEG Data Quality in Large-Scale Field Studies in India and Tanzania. Eneuro. 2025 Jul 1;12(7).

Newson JJ, Pastukh V, Thiagarajan TC. Assessment of population well-being with the Mental Health Quotient: validation study. JMIR Mental Health. 2022 Apr 20;9(4):e34105.

Appelhoff, S., Sanderson, M., Brooks, T., Vliet, M., Quentin, R., Holdgraf, C., Chaumon, M., Mikulan, E., Tavabi, K., Höchenberger, R., Welke, D., Brunner, C., Rockhill, A., Larson, E., Gramfort, A. and Jas, M. (2019). MNE-BIDS: Organizing electrophysiological data into the BIDS format and facilitating their analysis. Journal of Open Source Software 4: (1896).https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01896

Pernet, C. R., Appelhoff, S., Gorgolewski, K. J., Flandin, G., Phillips, C., Delorme, A., Oostenveld, R. (2019). EEG-BIDS, an extension to the brain imaging data structure for electroencephalography. Scientific Data, 6, 103.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-019-0104-8

